feat: OTEL plugin (overview + examples + changelog) (#929)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_kong_plugins/opentelemetry/index.md

    exclude_dimensions:
      - status.code
    metrics_flush_interval: 15s
    histogram:
      disable: false

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: []
      exporters: [spanmetrics]
    metrics:
      receivers: [spanmetrics]
      processors: []
      exporters: [otlphttp]
```

## Tracing

### Built-in tracing instrumentations

{{site.base_gateway}} has a series of built-in tracing instrumentations
which are configured by the `tracing_instrumentations` configuration.
{{site.base_gateway}} creates a top-level span for each request by default when `tracing_instrumentations` is enabled.

The top level span has the following attributes:
- `http.method`: HTTP method
- `http.url`: HTTP URL
- `http.host`: HTTP host
- `http.scheme`: HTTP scheme (http or https)
- `http.flavor`: HTTP version
- `net.peer.ip`: Client IP address

<!-- TODO: link to Gateway 3.0 tracing docs for details -->

### Propagation

The OpenTelemetry plugin supports propagation of the following header formats:
- `w3c`: [W3C trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/)
- `b3` and `b3-single`: [Zipkin headers](https://github.com/openzipkin/b3-propagation)

> - `jaeger`: [Jaeger headers](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/client-libraries/#propagation-format)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `jaeger`: [Jaeger headers](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/)
```

[`config.batch_span_count`](/plugins/opentelemetry/reference/#schema--config-batch-span-count) and [`config.batch_flush_delay`](/plugins/opentelemetry/reference/#schema--config-batch-flush-delay) are used to set the maximum number of spans and the delay between two consecutive batches.

### Create a custom span

The OpenTelemetry plugin is built on top of the {{site.base_gateway}} tracing PDK. You can customize the spans and add your own spans through the universal tracing PDK.

1. Create a file named `custom-span.lua` with the following content:

   ```lua
   -- Modify the root span
   local root_span = kong.tracing.active_span()
   root_span:set_attribute("custom.attribute", "custom value")

   -- Create a custom span
   local span = kong.tracing.start_span("custom-span")

   -- Append attributes
   span:set_attribute("custom.attribute", "custom value")
      
   -- Close the span
   span:finish()
   ```

> 2. Apply the Lua code using the `post-function` plugin using a cURL file upload:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Apply the Lua code with the [Post-function plugin](/plugins/post-function/) using a cURL file upload:
```

   ```bash
   curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/plugins \
     -F "name=post-function" \
     -F "config.access[1]=@custom-span.lua"
   ```

## Logging {% new_in 3.8 %}

This plugin supports [OpenTelemetry Logging](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/logs/), which can be configured as described in the [configuration reference](/plugins/opentelemetry/reference/#schema--config-traces_endpoint) to export logs in OpenTelemetry format to an OTLP-compatible backend.

### Log scopes

> Two different kinds of logs are exported: **Request** and **Non-Request** scoped.
>   * Request logs are directly associated with requests. These application logs are produced during the request lifecycle. For example, these could be logs generated by a plugin during its [Access or Response phase](/gateway/entities/plugin/#plugin-contexts), or by {{site.base_gateway}}'s core logic.
>   * Non-request logs aren't directly associated with a request. They're produced outside the request lifecycle. For example, this could be logs generated asynchronously (in a timer) or during a worker's startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two different kinds of logs are exported:
  * **Request** logs are directly associated with requests. These application logs are produced during the request lifecycle. For example, these could be logs generated by a plugin during its [Access or Response phase](/gateway/entities/plugin/#plugin-contexts), or by {{site.base_gateway}}'s core logic.
  * **Non-request** logs aren't directly associated with a request. They're produced outside the request lifecycle. For example, they could be logs generated asynchronously (in a timer) or during a worker's startup.
```

  - `introspection.current.line`: Line number that emitted the log.

In addition to the above, request-scoped logs include:
- `Attributes`: Additional information about the event.
  - `request.id`: {{site.base_gateway}}'s request ID.

In addition to the above, when **tracing** is enabled, request-scoped logs include:
- `TraceID`: Request trace ID.
- `SpanID`: Request span ID.
- `TraceFlags`: W3C trace flag.

### Logging for custom plugins

The custom [plugin PDK](/gateway/pdk/) `kong.telemetry.log` module lets you configure OTLP logging for a custom plugin. 
The module records a structured log entry, which is reported via the OpenTelemetry plugin.

## Queueing

The OpenTelemetry plugin uses a queue to decouple the production and
consumption of data. This reduces the number of concurrent requests
made to the upstream server under high load situations and provides
buffering during temporary network or upstream outages.

You can set several parameters to configure the behavior and capacity
of the queues used by the plugin. For more information about how to
use these parameters, see
[Plugin Queuing Reference](/gateway/entities/plugin/#plugin-queuing).

> The queue parameters all reside in a record under the key `queue` in
> the `config` parameter section of the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The queue parameters all reside in a record under [`config.queue`](/plugins/opentelemetry/reference/#schema--config-queue) in the plugin configuration.
```
